CEM-7: AI-Enhanced Extinction Model with Dynamic Feedback
CEM-7 is an advanced population simulation model designed to explore humanity's long-term demographic trajectory under a hypothetical scenario: a rapid, global cultural shift towards exclusive homosexuality.
This model moves beyond simple demographic projections by simulating a complex adaptive system. It integrates AI-driven forecasts for technological adoption with dynamic social and economic feedback loops to provide a more realistic and holistic view of systemic risk.
What Does This Model Do?
CEM-7 simulates the world population over a 200-year period, tracking the interplay between three primary forces:
A Cultural Shift (H): The fraction of the population identifying as exclusively homosexual (H(t)) rises over time, reducing the base for natural reproduction.
A Technological Solution (T): The efficacy of Assisted Reproductive Technologies (ART) like IVF and ectogenesis (T(t)) also rises, allowing non-heterosexual couples to have children. This is projected using a forecasting algorithm trained on historical data.
Systemic Feedback: This is the core innovation of CEM-7. The model includes two critical feedback loops that cause the system to behave in complex, non-linear ways:
Economic Health Cascade (Negative Feedback): Population decline damages the economy, which in turn hinders the deployment and scaling of expensive ART. This creates a potential "death spiral" where the solution is crippled by the problem it's trying to solve.
Social Crisis Aversion (Positive Feedback): If the population decline becomes a visible crisis, society can react by slowing the cultural shift toward non-reproduction, creating a potential (though often weak) stabilizing effect.
By running hundreds of Monte Carlo simulations with these dynamics, CEM-7 can estimate the probability of various outcomes, from population stability to catastrophic collapse.
How to Operate the Model Efficiently
The model is designed for ease of use and experimentation. All core logic is contained within the cem7.py script.
1. Installation
The model relies on standard scientific Python libraries. Install them via pip: pip install numpy pandas matplotlib statsmodels 2. Running a Standard Simulation
To run the simulation with the default configuration, simply execute the Python script from your terminal:
python cem7.py This will:
Initialize the model with the default parameters defined in SimulationConfig.
Run 500 Monte Carlo simulations.
Generate and display a multi-panel plot showing the results, including the population trajectory, technology levels, and feedback loop dynamics.
Print progress to the console.
3. Customizing Scenarios (Key to Efficient Operation)
The most powerful way to use this model is by modifying the SimulationConfig dataclass at the top of the cem7.py script. This allows you to explore different "what-if" scenarios without changing the core code.
To operate the model efficiently, focus on tweaking these key parameters:
Example: Test a "Techno-Optimist" Scenario
What if compliance is higher and technology develops faster? Edit the SimulationConfig object:
# --- Main Execution ---
if __name__ == "__main__":
    # Create a custom config for this run
    techno_optimist_config = SimulationConfig(
        base_compliance=0.95,  # 95% of couples attempt ART
        h_midpoint_year=100      # Social shift is slower (midpoint at year 100)
    )
    
    # Initialize components with the new config
    ai_forecaster = AIForecaster() # Forecaster is independent of this config
    model = DemographicModel(techno_optimist_config, ai_forecaster)
    
    print("Running Techno-Optimist scenario...")
    results_df = model.run_simulation()
    plot_results(results_df, techno_optimist_config) By changing these high-level parameters, you can rapidly test different hypotheses about the future and gain insight into which variables have the most impact on long-term survival.
4. Interpreting the Output
Population Trajectory Plot: The most important output. The median line shows the most likely outcome, while the shaded area shows the range of uncertainty (10th-90th percentile).
Subplots: Use the other plots (H-Fraction, Effective Tech, Economic Health) to understand why the population behaved the way it did. For example, a steep drop in the "Effective Tech" plot reveals that an economic cascade was the primary driver of a population crash.